New: Allow All Directives in Line Comments (#34)
eslint/rfcs: designs/2019-allow-all-directives-in-line-comments/README.md

- Start Date: 2019-07-22
- RFC PR: (leave this empty, to be filled in later)
- Authors: Jordan Eldredge <jordan@jordaneldredge.com>

# Allow All Directives in Line Comments

## Summary

> ESLint currently only allows the following types in directives to be used inside of block comments (`/* Block Comment */`):

Reviewer: Small typo: `types in directives` -> `types of directives`

The function `getDirectiveComments` in [`linter.js`](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/1fb362093a65b99456a11029967d9ee0c31fd697/lib/linter/linter.js#L263) currently does an `if (comment.type === "Block")` check before it looks for some types of directives.

I believe we could simply remove that check.

For `/* eslint-env */` directives which, by necessity, are parsed out of the file before an AST is avaliable, the regular expression in [linter.js](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/fb08b7c9d28bc68864eb940e26df274059228b6a/lib/linter/linter.js#L406) would need to be updated to allow it to match line comments.

## Documentation

We would need to update the [configuration](https://eslint.org/docs/user-guide/configuring#using-configuration-comments) documentation to remove the places where it states that some types of directives must use block comments. We would replace each of those comments with a note that "Before version _x.x_ this directive only worked in block comments" so that users using an older version of ESLint could figure out why their line comments were ignored.

## Drawbacks

I don't see any drawbacks to this change.

## Backwards Compatibility Analysis

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you update this section with the explanation that those changes will be backwards-compatible but would be considered breaking due to the example with `// global` comment.

> `lineNumTokenBefore = 0; // global return at beginning of script`

-- [newline-before-return.js:173](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/02d7542cfd0c2e95c2222b1e9e38228f4c19df19/lib/rules/newline-before-return.js#L137)

This would result in the following, somewhat confusing, error after upgrading to a version that contained this change:

```
/Users/jeldredge/projects/eslint/lib/rules/newline-before-return.js
  137:51  error  'return' is defined but never used     no-unused-vars
  137:58  error  'at' is defined but never used         no-unused-vars
  137:61  error  'beginning' is defined but never used  no-unused-vars
  137:71  error  'of' is defined but never used         no-unused-vars
  137:74  error  'script' is defined but never used     no-unused-vars

✖ 5 problems (5 errors, 0 warnings)
```

## Alternatives

An earlier revision of this RFC suggested reporting an error/warning when a directive that is only supported in a block comment was found in a line comment. See the following section for a discussion of why this may be a worth doing in addition to the changes detailed above.

## Optional Short Term Improvements

> Since code bases may contain line comments which were not intended as directives, but would be parsed as such after this change, (see [Accidental Directives](#accidental-directives) above) this change will be a breaking change and thus will need to wait for a major release. If the next major release is far off we could employ a short term fix of making line comment directives warnings which could be shipped in a minor release.

Reviewer 2: Another possibility would be to make the changes to all comments but `// global` for now, and leave global to the next major release.

Reviewer 3: I don't think `// global` is the only example. If someone writes `// eslint is stupid`, then that will attempt to be parsed as a configuration of the rule `is` (and will fail due to lack of colon).

Reviewer 2: Fair enough. I'll remove this comment.

- Start Date: 2019-07-22
- RFC PR: (leave this empty, to be filled in later)
- Authors: Jordan Eldredge <jordan@jordaneldredge.com>

# Allow All Directives in Line Comments

## Summary

ESLint currently only allows the following types in directives to be used inside of block comments (`/* Block Comment */`):

* `exported`
* `global(s)`
* `eslint-(en|dis)able`
* `eslint`

Currently if a user adds one of these directives in a line comment (`// Line Comment`) the directive will be silently ignored. Which can be very confusing.

I propose that we allow all directives to work in either type of comment.

## Motivation

> As a user of ESLint I occasionally wish to disable a rule, declare a valid global or add some other file level config. In doing so I often forget that these directives are only valid inside block level comments and add them as inline comments by mistake. When the comment fails to have its desired effect I consult the documentation to see what I did wrong. Did I missremember the directive syntax or name? On more than one occasion the problem has been that I used the wrong kind of comment.

Reviewer 3: My spellcheck was flagging this one but it also flagged the way I would normally type it, so I came up with a longer way-- disregard if you like.

```suggestion
As a user of ESLint I occasionally wish to disable a rule, declare a valid global or add some other file level config. In doing so I often forget that these directives are only valid inside block level comments and add them as inline comments by mistake. When the comment fails to have its desired effect I consult the documentation to see what I did wrong. Did I remember the directive syntax or name incorrectly? On more than one occasion the problem has been that I used the wrong kind of comment.
```

### Accidental Directives

Users may also have written inline comments which were not intended as a directive, but parse as directives. I found one example in ESLint's own codebase:

> `lineNumTokenBefore = 0; // global return at beginning of script`

-- [newline-before-return.js:173](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/02d7542cfd0c2e95c2222b1e9e38228f4c19df19/lib/rules/newline-before-return.js#L137)

This would result in the following, somewhat confusing, error after upgrading to a version that contained this change:

```
/Users/jeldredge/projects/eslint/lib/rules/newline-before-return.js
  137:51  error  'return' is defined but never used     no-unused-vars
  137:58  error  'at' is defined but never used         no-unused-vars
  137:61  error  'beginning' is defined but never used  no-unused-vars
  137:71  error  'of' is defined but never used         no-unused-vars
  137:74  error  'script' is defined but never used     no-unused-vars

✖ 5 problems (5 errors, 0 warnings)
```

## Alternatives

> An earlier revision of this RFC suggested reporting an error/warning when a directive that is only supported in a bock comment was found in a line comment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An earlier revision of this RFC suggested reporting an error/warning when a directive that is only supported in a block comment was found in a line comment.
```
